It is such a strange feeling I have right now. I have just learned that LaVoy Finicum, one of the militants occupying the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge in Oregon, was killed in a stand off with the FBI. Having recently lost my grandfather, I am feeling especially sensitive to anyone's death. When I first learned that Finicum and the Bundy brothers had begun their occupation of the Malheur NWR, I was perturbed by their actions and upset that they were able to simply waltz in an take over. I was angry that swift action had not been taken, which I'm almost certain it would have, had these men been anything other than white and "Christian". Not to mention the fact that what they were doing was mild terrorism, if not outright treason.
As their occupation continued, I had a mocking attitude toward them and their seeming lack of preparation. I was amused when the group received a box of dildos and a drum of personal lubricant. Also, who decides that the best course of action to get their point across is to move into a federal building on a nature preserve in the middle of nowhere, in January?
I found their freedom to move about without the intervention of law enforcement strange and bothersome. I followed a story from Chris Zinda, a local activist in favor of protecting public lands, as he learned that Mr. Finicum was not in Oregon, but was in fact, in Cedar City, UT doing an interview for the local radio station. Mr. Zinda waited outside the radio station and spoke with Finicum as he was leaving, even posing with LaVoy for a picture to prove his presence in Utah. Chris expressed his admiration for Finicum's convictions even though their views differed greatly.
I learned a couple days later that Finicum, a "highly effective" foster parent in the state of Arizona had his foster children taken away because of his involvement with the Oregon Standoff. While my first reaction when learning of this was something along the lines of "good, serves him right," I started thinking about the other lives involved in this situation. His wife, Jeanette, who I'm sure, just like any other mother cared for the children. The children who, being in the foster system, already lead lives of which I struggle even to comprehend the difficulty. Although Finicum being away didn't make for a very 'stable' home environment, from what I understand, his ranch was an otherwise stable place for these children to be raised. I also started to think about how Finicum himself must have felt about the children. I'm sure he was a caring person, despite my inclination to paint him as a backwoods yokel wanting to overthrow the government.
When I saw that federal agents had performed a traffic stop resulting in shots being fired, I hoped no one had been injured. I was glad that this standoff was ostensibly over. When I learned two had been hospitalized, I hoped it was minor injuries. I thought "good, that pain and hospital bill will teach them what happens when you try to overthrow the government." Upon learning someone had died, I had a suspicious feeling it was Finicum, even without reading who had been in the group. When my feeling was confirmed, I started thinking about how I felt about the situation. I started thinking about how I actually felt about the human life involved. I became sad and angry. Sad and angry that someone had to die. I'd like to believe that the agents were justified in what they did. I'll learn this as more news becomes available.
I was sad that Finicum is dead. I was sad it had to end this way. But, I started contemplating what my feelings meant in my overall thoughts on the situation in Oregon. When the news first broke, I was practically advocating for these men to be shot. But was I really? Or did simply think that is what they deserved because that is the fate that comes to people of color when they speak out? I don't think people of color or non-Chrisitians or any other groups deserve the fate they receive.
I am also trying to understand why I feel sad about Finicum's death. I never met the man. I disagree with his political views. I learn of the deaths of people all the time, but don't normally feel enough to, for example, write several paragraphs about my feelings on the situation. I am reminded of the shooting of Trayvon Martin, or the death of Sandra Bland, or the countless other innocent lives that have been lost. I am angry about their deaths, and I am sad, but not the same kind of sad that I am feeling right now. I may have disagreed with these people, but I never had the chance to learn more about them. They are people I never heard of before their deaths. Maybe this is why I feel how I do about Finicum's death.
Regardless, thank you for reading this to the end if you made it here. Please share your thoughts with me. And Chris, thank you for helping me to remember LaVoy's humanity. I hope I can remember to appreciate the humanity of others with whom I disagree.

I realize this post is lengthy and rambling, but it has helped me to process the conflicted feelings I'm having right now. If anyone would like to offer insights into their thoughts, I would appreciate it.

TL;DR: I feel sad that LaVoy Finicum was killed. I feel weird about feeling sad because I disagree so strongly with the views he held.
